Molecular Cell
Identification of a New Nicotinamide Binding Site in a Sirtuin: A Reassessment
Cynthia Wolberger':?.* ‘Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205-2185, USA
Correspondence: cwolberg@jhmi.edu DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.006
Sir2 enzymes, also known as sirtuins, comprise a highly conserved family of NAD*-dependent deacetylases and ADP ribosyltransferases that regulate key biological pro- cesses, including transcriptional silencing, chromosome stability, apoptosis, and metabolism (reviewed in Michan and Sinclair, 2007; Sauve et al., 2006). The reaction cata- lyzed by sirtuins is inhibited by nicotinamide, a reaction product that binds the enzyme and reacts with the O-alky- lamidate intermediate to yield NAD* and the acetylated substrate. Understanding the structural basis for nicotin- amide inhibition is important to an understanding of phys- iological regulation of sirtuins by nicotinamide as well as for the development of small molecule regulators of sirtuin activity. A recent paper (Sanders et al., 2007) reports the identification of a nicotinamide binding site in the structure of the yeast sirtuin Hst2 that the authors term the “D pocket.” Because a different binding site for nicotinamide was previously identified by my laboratory based on struc- tural and biochemical studies (Avalos et al., 2005), it was of interest to us to explore the experimental basis for iden- tifying a second pocket where nicotinamide could bind and inhibit the deacetylation reaction. An examination of the data deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB code 2O0D9) as part of the Sanders et al. (2007) report, however, reveals inconsistencies with the claims in the paper. There is no room for nicotinamide as placed in the structure, nor are there features in the electron density maps that can be interpreted as nicotinamide. The assertion that nicotin- amide binds in the D pocket does not appear to be sup- ported by the data.
The steric clashes made by the D pocket nicotinamide arise from its insertion between the acetyl-lysine side
A B /
nicotinamide ADP-HPD ACLys 1.7 A og 2.14 7A
chain and an ADP ribose analog that are already in van der Waals contact with one another. The Hst2 structure with PDB code 20D39 includes bound acetylated peptide, the ADP ribose analog, ADP-HPD, and nicotinamide and shows the pyridine ring of nicotinamide between the oxy- gen of the acetyl-lysine side chain and the ribose of ADP- HPD (see Figure 2C of Sanders et al., 2007). Examination of the coordinates, however, reveals significant steric clashes between the nicotinamide ring and the neighbor- ing atoms (Figure 1A) that are flagged in the header of the PDB file 20D9. The clashes between the pyridine ring of nicotinamide and the ribose are particularly severe, with distances between nonbonded atoms in the 1.62-1.70 A range (Figure 1A). Atoms that are not joined by a covalent bond cannot be that close to one another. The pyridine ring is also too close to the acetyl oxygen, with distances in the ~2.1 A range (Figure 1A), and is also 2.5-2.7 A from the side chain of Phe67 (data not shown). The acetyl oxy- gen and the ADP-HPD ribose are already within van der Waals contact distance from one another (~3.7 A), which leaves no room for the placement of nicotinamide be- tween these groups (Figure 1B). These clashes are not readily evident in Figure 2C of Sanders et al. (2007) be- cause of the limitations of assessing distances in a two-di- mensional picture. A direct inspection of the coordinates, however, shows that it is not possible for the nicotinamide to be bound as shown in the paper.
Electron density maps were inspected to see what fea- tures in the density might have led to the current interpre- tation, steric clashes notwithstanding. The Uppsala Elec- tron Density Server link (http://eds.bmc.uu.se/) at the PDB was used to download a 2F, — F, map for the
Figure 1. Clashes of Nicotinamide with ADP-HPD and Acetyl Lysine (A) Interatomic distances between nicotin-
Le \ amide, the ADP-HPD ribose, and the acetyl ox- ygen. (B) Space-filling model of ADP-HPD (left) and acetyl lysine (right) shows that there is no room for the interposition of nicotinamide, which is depicted as a stick model (magenta).
aLys. ‘ADP-HPD hy
nicotinamide
1102 Molecular Cell 28, 1102-1103, December 28, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc.
Molecular Cell Matters Arising
‘ADP-HPD
ADP-HPD
ADP-HPD
Figure 2. Electron Density Maps
(A) 2F. — F, map (contoured at 10) for the structure of Hst2 bound to ADP-HPD (20D9), acetylated peptide, and nicotinamide showing den- sity in the vicinity of nicotinamide (magenta). Downloaded from the Up- psala Electron Density Server (EDS).
(B) 2F, — F, electron density map (10) for the structure of Hst2 bound to ADP-HPD and acetylated peptide in the absence of nicotinamide (20D7). For reference, the position of nicotinamide in the 20D9 struc- ture is indicated with gray lines. Map downloaded from the Uppsala Electron Density Server (EDS).
(C) Omit map calculated from 20D9 coordinates with nicotinamide and ADP-HPD omitted. F, — F, density is displayed with a 2.50 cutoff. Map calculated with CCP4 (CCP4, 1994) using diffraction data downloaded from the PDB (20D9).
structure of Hst2 bound to nicotinamide, ADP-HPD, and acetylated peptide (2OD9) as well as the map for the com- plex without nicotinamide (20D7). As shown in Figure 2A,
there is no density corresponding to the pyridine ring. Moreover, part of the carboxamide lies in density that ex- tends beyond the carboxamide itself and does not contain features that identify it as the carboxamide. There is addi- tional density extending from the ribose of ADP-HD to- ward the distal part of the nicotinamide ring. However, similar density is found in the 2F, — F, map of the structure of the Hst2/ADP-HPD/peptide complex prior to soaking in nicotinamide (Figure 2B), as is some additional density in the vicinity of the carboxamide, indicating that these den- sity features are not the result of bound nicotinamide. An omit map calculated with phases from the model 20D9 from which nicotinamide and ADP-HPD were omitted sim- ilarly shows no density corresponding to the nicotinamide (Figure 2C). The maps in Figures 2A and 2C should have shown greater bias toward the authors’ model than the simulated annealing omit map reported in the paper, yet they still contain no features consistent with the presence of nicotinamide.
The lack of room for the nicotinamide as placed in the structure, taken alone, argues against the interpretation that nicotinamide binds to Hst2 in the location described as the D pocket (Sanders et al., 2007). The absence of electron density for the nicotinamide in the vicinity of the D pocket similarly does not support the claims in the paper. We therefore conclude that the assertion that nico- tinamide binds in the D pocket is not supported by the data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
C.W. is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of Sirtris Pharma- ceuticals.
REFERENCES
Avalos, J.L., Bever, K.M., and Wolberger, C. (2005). Mechanism of sir- tuin inhibition by nicotinamide: altering the NAD* cosubstrate specific- ity of a Sir2 enzyme. Mol. Cell 17, 855-868.
CCP4 (Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4) (1994). The CCP4 suite: programs for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 50, 760-763.
Michan, S., and Sinclair, D. (2007). Sirtuins in mammals: insights into their biological function. Biochem. J. 404, 1-13.
Sanders, B.D., Zhao, K., Slama, J.T., and Marmorstein, R. (2007). Structural basis for nicotinamide inhibition and base exchange in Sir2 enzymes. Mol. Cell 25, 463-472.
Sauve, A.A., Wolberger, C., Schramm, V.L., and Boeke, J.D. (2006). The biochemistry of sirtuins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 75, 435-465.
Molecular Cell 28, 1102-1103, December 28, 2007 ©2007 Elsevier Inc. 1103
